---
layout: post
title: The Donor-Advised Fund
date: 2025-12-26
author: Paul Berens
tags: ["personal finance"]
description: The financial tool you're probably overlooking
---
Tell me if this is familiar: late December rolls around, and amidst all the Christmas hustle and bustle, we suddenly realize we need to make our charitable giving decisions and contributions before the close of the current tax year. And so we find ourselves hastily "peanut buttering" donations across various organizations—a little here, a little there—just to add up to a certain dollar amount and get processed before December 31.

Not very intentional; just financial triage.

Enter the <mark><b>donor-advised fund (DAF)</b></mark>. A DAF changes this dynamic. Here's the concept: You contribute money to the fund and receive an immediate tax deduction. The funds are invested and grow tax-free. Then you distribute grants to charities on your own timeline—next month, next year, or a decade from now.

The benefits are straightforward:
- **Tax efficiency**: Take the deduction when it makes sense for your tax situation, not when you feel pressure to give before year-end.
- **Thoughtful giving**: Separate the tax decision from the charitable decision. You can research organizations, respond to real needs as they arise (or anticipate some greater future need), and give with genuine intention rather than calendar-driven urgency.
- **Growth potential**: Charitable dollars grow tax-free before you distribute them, potentially (hopefully) increasing your total charitable impact.
- **Anonymous Giving**: Not sure if this is the case with every DAF, but I like the idea of anonymous giving: it's good for the humility to be spared the thanks and praise.

Maybe the biggest misconception about DAFs is that they're only for the ultra-wealthy. The reality is that they're more accessible than you'd think with many DAF providers[^1] setting initial contributions at or below what many families already give to charity annually. If you take charitable giving seriously (or haven't yet but could), you're likely already giving enough (or could be) to make a DAF worthwhile.

[^1]: We're using [Vanguard Charitable](https://www.vanguardcharitable.org/).

Think of a DAF as sitting alongside your other tax-advantaged accounts:

| Purpose | Tool |
| :--- | :--- |
| Retirement | 401(k), Roth IRA, etc.[^2]|
| Education | 529 |
| Healthcare | HSA |
| **Philanthropy** | **Donor-advised fund** |

[^2]: I'll uncover the wonders of the surprisingly legal Backdoor Roth conversion in a future post.

If you're giving to charity with any regularity, and especially if you've ever felt that aforementioned December deadline crunch, a donor-advised fund might be what's missing from your financial quiver.

— ᴘ. ᴍ. ʙ.